
\smallskip
\noindent

{\em 1. Unpredictability sets in very early in time.} \ Our results
show that computational hardness based unpredictability of macroscopic
as well as individual properties of epidemic dynamics happen very
early in time. This is important.  One intuitively expects hardness
to set in after a polynomial number of steps.

The results should be contrasted with two earlier results: one by
us and others on reachability in dynamical systems when the state
update functions are deterministic; in this case it takes exponential
time to get unpredictability results; and the results of Rabani,
Vazirani and Arora for quadratic dynamical systems that get
PSPACE-hardness in polynomial number of steps.

Second, both macroscopic and individual properties are unpredictable.
Furthermore, the results can be extended to show that the
unpredictability results hold even when the system dynamics are
known for the first $t$ time periods and one needs to forecast the
outcome at time $t+1$ and beyond. In other words, atleast from the
worst case standpoint, unpredictability results do not change even
if we know the system evolution for a few time periods.

\smallskip
\noindent
{\em 2. Results hold when we have just one random parameter.} \ The
results hold when there is exactly one source of randomness, namely
the transmission probability. Rest of the model parameters are known
in advance and deterministic. This includes the incubation time,
infectious period, network and the starting condition which has
exactly one node as the index node.  We is the goal in computational
complexity theory, the hardness results are best proven for simplest
instances.  In a companion paper, we consider when the initial
conditions are not known precisely.

\smallskip
\noindent
{\em 3. The results are pervasive.} \
The unpredictability results are pervasive in the sense that they
hold for a large variant of problems  and also for a number of
different contagion dynamics. The variants include, individual and
macroscopic quantities (e.g. probability of a single node being
infected versus probability that the total number of infections
after t time units is above a threshold, peak time, time to peak,
etc.).

Furthermore the results hold even for power law networks and also
networks that have small diameter. They also hold when the network
is a clique so far as we allow a few different kinds of transmission
probabilities.

\smallskip
\noindent
{\em  4. Provable predictability results for certain special cases.} \
For certain special cases, one can compute provable approximations.
One such special case is expected number of infections.  Another
is computing the probability of a single node being infected by
time t (when t is fixed). Finally another result show how to compute
the probability that the total number of infections after a few
time steps is above a certain threshold.  The last results are
interesting and is based on using an importance sampling technique.


\smallskip
Taken together, our results show that one cannot expect to find
(worst case complexity) provable algorithms for predicting epidemic
dynamics on networks.  The results do not rule out practical
heuristics of course, but they say that good algorithms that work
across a range of inputs should exploit the underlying structure
of the problem somehow.
